---
title: "Translating from Chemistry to Clinic with Deep Learning"
description: "Translating from Chemistry to Clinic with Deep Learning"
tags: 
  - Big Data
  - Data Science
  - Deep Learning
  - Chemistry
  - Clinical
date: "2018-03-07"
categories:
  - "Lecture"
thumbnail: "https://substance.etsmtl.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/bigdata-header.jpg"
presenter: "S. Joshua Swamidass, MD, PhD"
affiliation: "Assistant Professor, Laboratory and Genomic Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine"
location: "Natcher (Building 35), Room E1/E2"
startTime: "14:00"
endTime: "15:00"
webinar: "http://videocast.nih.gov"
video: ""
slides: ""
externalUrl: "https://databricks.com"
---
*NLM Informatics and Data Science Lecture Series*

*Abstract:* Many medicines become toxic only after bioactivation by
metabolizing enzymes. Often, metabolic enzymes transformed them into
chemically reactive species, which subsequently conjugate to proteins
and cause adverse events. For example, carbamazepine is epoxidized by
P450 enzymes in the liver, but then conjugates to proteins, causing
Stevens Johnson Syndrome in some patients. The most difficult to
predict drug reactions, idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions, often
depend on bioactivation. Our group has been using deep learning to
model the metabolism of diverse chemicals, and the subsequent
reactivity of their metabolites. Deep learning systematically
summarizes the information from thousands of publications into
quantitative models of bioactivation, predicting exactly how medicines
are modified by metabolic enzymes. These models are giving deeper
understanding of why some drugs become toxic, and others do not. At
the same time, deep learning can be used to understand drug toxicity
as it arises in clinical data, and why some patients are affected, but
not others. A conversation between the basic and clinical sciences is
now possible, where patient outcomes can be understood in light of
bioactivation mechanisms, and these mechanisms can explain why some
patients are susceptible to drug toxicity, and others are not.

*About the speaker:* S. Joshua Swamidass is an Assistant Professor of
Laboratory and Genomic Medicine at Washington University School of
Medicine (http://swami.wustl.edu). His group studies information with
new computational methods, at the intersection of biology, medicine
and chemistry. He is funded by the National Library Medicine (NLM) to
model bioactivation pathways, and how bioactivation pathways change in
children. Dr. Swamidass is currently on the NLM Biomedical
Informatics, Library and Data Sciences Review Committee.

Sign Language Interpreters will be provided. Individuals with
disabilities who need reasonable accommodation to participate in this
lecture should contact Ms. Ebony Hughes 301-451-8038
Ebony.Hughes@nih.gov or the Federal Relay (1-800-877-8339).

- *Sponsored by:* Dr. Valerie Florance, Associate Director for Extramural Programs National Library of Medicine
- *Event contact:* Jane Ye, Ph.D, Division of Extramural Programs, National Library of Medicine, NIH, 301-594-4882, [yej@mail.nih.gov](mailto:yej@mail.nih.gov)
