---
title: "One-day NIH Data Science Learning and Testing Hackathon (application required)"
note: "Application Required"
description: "One-day NIH Data Science Learning and Testing Hackathon (application required)"
tags: 
  - Hackathon
  - Training
date: "2018-02-23"
categories:
  - Training
location: "NIH Campus--Participants will be informed upon acceptance"
start: "9:00 AM"
end: "5:00 PM"
externalUrl: "http://bit.ly/2ndjvXt"
sponsor: "NLM/NCBI"
---

# About the event

The NIH will host a Learning and Testing Data Science hackathon on
February 23rd, 2018 on the main campus in Bethesda, MD.  Learners will
test alpha and beta code that have been generated in full,
collaborative development hackathons for a wide range of scientific
problems, including general bioinformatics and genomic analyses in
addition to text, image, and sequence processing. This event is for
researchers who are in the early stages of their data science journey,
including students and postdocs. Other non-scientific developers,
mathematicians, or librarians in a similar educational place are also
welcome! Learning in this event will be primarily hands-on and
self-driven, but will also include short workshops on topics such as
Docker and GitHub. Mentors will also be available to assist with
questions.

To be considered for the event, potential participants must submit an
application and indicate their willingness to travel to the main NIH
Campus in Bethesda (see details below).


The hackathon will consist of teams of two to three individuals.
These teams will run tools developed at previous NIH hackathons,
including novel bioinformatics pipelines and tools to analyze large
datasets within a cloud infrastructure. Based on their experiences and
issues with running the tools, teams will submit GitHub issues and
provide feedback and input by submitting a GitHub pull request.
Students will also be encouraged to get involved by assisting with
code documentation, error handling ,and container modification (for
more advanced learners).  Potential tools to be considered in this
hackathon include: 

- Discovering novel and known viruses in large
datasets 
- Discovering antibiotic resistance in metagenomic datasets
- Viewing single-cell SNPs 
- SNP association with diseases through
literature 
- Graphical User Interface for Gene Expression calculated on
the fly from raw data

Please see the application [form] for more details and additional
projects.  The project list will continue to evolve and will be
updated on the application form.

## Organization 

After a brief organizational session, teams will spend one day working
on a challenging set of scientific problems related to a group of
datasets. Participants will analyze and combine datasets in
order to work on these problems. 

## Datasets 

Datasets will come from public repositories or will be supplied by the
organizer. During the hackathon, participants will have an opportunity
to include other datasets and tools for analysis.  Please note, if you
use your own data during the hackathon, we ask that you submit it to a
public database within six months of the end of the event. 

## Application 

To apply, complete this [form] (approximately 10 minutes to
complete). Applications are due Monday, February 12th, 2017 by 11:59
pm ET. Participants will be selected based on their experience and
motivation they provide on the <FORM> Prior participants and
applicants are especially encouraged to apply.  The first round of
accepted applicants will be notified on by 10 am ET on Feb 14th, and
have until February 16th at noon ET to confirm their participation.
If you confirm, please make sure it is highly likely you can attend,
as confirming and not attending prevents other data scientists from
attending this event.  Please include a monitored email address, in
case there are follow-up questions.

*Note*: Participants will need to bring their own laptop to this
program.  It will be useful to have some experience with either a
command line interface, R or Python.  Applicants must be willing to
commit to the entire day of the event.  _No financial support for
travel, lodging or meals is available for this event._

Please contact [ben.busby@nih.gov](mailto:ben.busby@nih.gov) with any questions.

### Venue: 

NIH Campus, Bethesda, Maryland.  

Friday, February 23rd, 9 am - 5 pm Location: Released to participants
upon acceptance Announcement with links to Application:
http://bit.ly/2ndjvXt

[form]: https://goo.gl/forms/yYR0vcq11xDO0erD2
